---
title: "RS/6000 Hints"
type: archives
noindex: true 
sitemap_exclude: true
---

15.7.1993

* * *

`xntp3` compiles now again on AIX. I have disabled prototyping and added the switch `-D_NO_PROTO` which disables prototyping in the system include files.

Matthias Ernst

* * *

`xntp` version 3 now supports the `cc` compiler for AIX. The `Config.aix` will now use `cc` by default.  You can still compile `xntp` with the bsd compiler by changing `COMP= cc` to `COMP= bsdcc` and removing the `-DSTUPID_SIGNAL` option from the `DEFS` option.

`xntp` and `tickadj` was also modified  so that the value of `tickadj` is read from the kernel and can be set by `tickadj`.  For now I would not set `tickadj` below 40 us.   

Bill Jones

* * *

This is a modified version of `xntp` version 3 for the RS6000. It works for AIX 3.2 and these are the same changes as have been applied to the version 2 implementation of `xntp`. It works fine for us but I have not tested all of the features, especially the local clock support for the RS6000 is not tested
at all.

Matthias Ernst, ETH-Zuerich, Switzerland

* * *

Here is the original `README.rs6000` for the version 2 implementation:

A hacked version of `xntp` for the IBM RS/6000 under AIX 3.1 can be found in `xntp.rs6000.tar.Z`. [ if still available at all - Frank Kardel 93/12/3 ]

This will not work on older versions of AIX due to a kernel bug;  to find out whether you have the kernel bug, compile and run `testrs6000.c` (see comments in the code for instructions).

`xntp` and `testrs6000` require `bsdcc` to compile.  This is simply another entry point into the `xlc` compiler with various options set for BSD compatibility.  If your system does not have `bsdcc`, do the following:

`link /bin/bsdcc /bin/xlc`

and put the following into `/etc/xlc.cfg`:

<pre>
* BSD compatibility
bsdcc:  use        = DEFLT
        crt        = /lib/crt0.o
        mcrt       = /lib/mcrt0.o
        gcrt       = /lib/gcrt0.o
        libraries  = -lbsd, -lc
        proflibs   = -L/lib/profiled,-L/usr/lib/profiled
        options    = -H512,-T512, -qlanglvl=extended, -qnoro, -D_BSD, -D_NONSTD_TYPES, -D_NO_PROTO, -tp,-B/lib/

</pre>