---
title: "KSI/Odetics TPRO/S IRIG Interface"
type: archives
noindex: true 
sitemap_exclude: true
---

#### Table of Contents

*   [Synopsis](/documentation/3-5.93e/driver12/#synopsis)
*   [Description](/documentation/3-5.93e/driver12/#description)
*   [Monitor Data](/documentation/3-5.93e/driver12/#monitor-data)
*   [Fudge Factors](/documentation/3-5.93e/driver12/#fudge-factors)
*   [Additional Information](/documentation/3-5.93e/driver12/#additional-information)

* * *

#### Synopsis

**Address:** <code>127.127.12._u_</code>  
: **Reference ID:** <code>IRIG</code>
: **Driver ID:** <code>IRIG_TPRO</code>
: **TPRO Device:** <code>/dev/tpro\__u_</code>
: **Requires:** KSI/Odetics device driver, <code>/usr/include/sys/tpro.h</code> header file

* * *

#### Description

This driver supports the KSI/Odetics TPRO and TPRO-SAT IRIG-B Decoder, which is a module connected directly to the SBus of a Sun workstation. The module works with the IRIG-B signal generated by several radio clocks, including those made by Arbiter, Austron, Odetics, Spectracom and TrueTime, among others, although it is generally an add- on option. In the case of the TPRO-SAT, the module is an integral part of a GPS receiver, which serves as the primary timing source. 

Using the TPRO interface as a NTP reference clock provides precision time only to xntpd and its clients. With suitable kernel modifications, it is possible to use the TPRO as the CPU system clock, avoiding errors introduced by the CPU clock oscillator wander. See the [A Kernel Model for Precision Timekeeping](/documentation/3-5.93e/kern/) page for further details.

* * *

#### Monitor Data

The driver writes each timecode as received to the <code>clockstats</code> file. 

* * *

#### Fudge Factors

<code>**time1 _time_**</code>

: Specifies the time offset calibration factor, in seconds and fraction, with default 0.0. For a calibrated Sun IPC, the correct value is about .00037.

<code>**time2 _time_**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**stratum _number_**</code>

: Specifies the driver stratum, in decimal from 0 to 15, with default 0.

<code>**refid _string_**</code>

: Specifies the driver reference identifier, an ASCII string from one to four characters, with default <code>IRIG</code>.

<code>**flag1 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**flag2 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**flag3 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**flag4 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

* * *

#### Additional Information

[Reference Clock Drivers](/documentation/3-5.93e/refclock/)