---
title: "KSI/Odetics TPRO/S IRIG Interface"
description: "The KSI/Odetics TPRO/S IRIG Interface driver supports the KSI/Odetics TPRO and TPRO-SAT IRIG-B Decoder, which is a module connected directly to the SBus of a Sun workstation."
type: archives
---

Author: [David L. Mills](https://www.nwtime.org/tribute-to-david-l-mills/)

* * *

#### Table of Contents

*   [Synopsis](/documentation/drivers/driver12/#synopsis)
*   [Description](/documentation/drivers/driver12/#description)
*   [Fudge Factors](/documentation/drivers/driver12/#fudge-factors)
*   [Additional Information](/documentation/drivers/driver12/#additional-information)

* * *

#### Synopsis

**Address:** <code>127.127.12._u_</code>

**Reference ID:** `IRIG`

**Driver ID:** `IRIG_TPRO`

**TPRO Device:** <code>/dev/tpro*u*</code>

**Requires:** KSI/Odetics device driver, `/usr/include/sys/tpro.h` header file

* * *

#### Description

This driver supports the KSI/Odetics TPRO and TPRO-SAT IRIG-B Decoder, which is a module connected directly to the SBus of a Sun workstation. The module works with the IRIG-B signal generated by several radio clocks, including those made by Arbiter, Austron, Odetics, Spectracom and TrueTime, among others, although it is generally an add-on option. In the case of the TPRO-SAT, the module is an integral part of a GPS receiver, which serves as the primary timing source.

Using the TPRO interface as a NTP reference clock provides precision time only to `ntpd` and its clients. With suitable kernel modifications, it is possible to use the TPRO as the CPU system clock, avoiding errors introduced by the CPU clock oscillator wander. See the [A Kernel Model for Precision Timekeeping](/documentation/4.2.8-series/kern/) page for further details.

* * *

#### Fudge Factors

<code>**time1 _time_**</code>

: Specifies the time offset calibration factor, in seconds and fraction, with default 0.0.

<code>**time2 _time_**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**stratum _number_**</code>

: Specifies the driver stratum, in decimal from 0 to 15, with default 0.

<code>**refid _string_**</code>

: Specifies the driver reference identifier, an ASCII string from one to four characters, with default `IRIG`.

<code>**flag1 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**flag2 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**flag3 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

<code>**flag4 0 | 1**</code>

: Not used by this driver.

* * *

#### Additional Information

[Reference Clock Drivers](/documentation/4.2.8-series/refclock/)